README.md, before:

## ecron
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/zhongwencool/ecron.png?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/zhongwencool/ecron)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/zhongwencool/ecron/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/github/zhongwencool/ecron?branch=master)
[![Hex.pm](https://img.shields.io/hexpm/v/ecron.svg?style=flat)](https://hex.pm/packages/ecron)

A lightweight/efficient cron-like job scheduling library for Erlang.

Ecron does not poll the system on a minute-by-minute basis like cron does. 
All jobs is assigned to a single process, just run as same as the [timer](http://erlang.org/doc/man/timer.html).

It organize the tasks to be run in a ordered_set ets with the next time to run as key. 
This way, you only need one process that calculates the time to wait until the next task should be executed, 
then spawn the process to execute that task. Saves lots of processes. 
more detail see [Implementation](#Implementation).
 
This implementation also prevents a lot of messages from flying around.

It offers:

* Both cron-like scheduling and interval-based scheduling.
* Well tested by `PropTest` ![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/zhongwencool/ecron/badge.svg?branch=master).
* Use gen_server timeout(`receive after`) at any given time (rather than reevaluating upcoming jobs every second/minute).
* Minimal overhead. ecron aims to keep its code base small.

You can find a collection of general best practices in [Full Erlang Examples](https://github.com/zhongwencool/ecron/blob/master/examples/titan_erlang) and [Full Elixir Examples](https://github.com/zhongwencool/ecron/blob/master/examples/titan_elixir).

## Installation
  
**Erlang**
 ```erlang
  %% rebar.config
  {deps, [ecron]}
 ```

**Elixir**
 ```elixir
  # mix.exs
  def deps do
    [{:ecron, "~> 0.4"}]
  end
```

## Basic Usage 

```erlang
%% sys.config
[
   {ecron, [      
      {time_zone, local}, %% local or utc
      {jobs, [                
         %% {JobName, CrontabSpec, {M, F, A}}
         %% {JobName, CrontabSpec, {M, F, A}, StartDateTime, EndDateTime}
         %% CrontabSpec
            %%  1. "Minute Hour DayOfMonth Month DayOfWeek"
            %%  2. "Second Minute Hour DayOfMonth Month DayOfWeek"
            %%  3. @yearly | @annually | @monthly | @weekly | @daily | @midnight | @hourly
            %%  4. @every 1h2m3s
                  
         {crontab_job, "*/15 * * * *", {io, format, ["Runs on 0, 15, 30, 45 minutes~n"]}},
         {extend_crontab_job, "0 0 1-6/2,18 * * *", {io, format, ["Runs on 1,3,6,18 o'clock:~n"]}},
         {alphabet_job, "@hourly", {io, format, ["Runs every(0-23) o'clock~n"]}},    
         {fixed_interval_job, "@every 30m", {io, format, ["Runs every 30 minutes"]}},
         %% Runs 0-23 o'clock since {{2019,9,26},{0,0,0}}.
         {limit_datetime_job, "@hourly", {io, format, ["Runs every(0-23) o'clock~n"]}, {{2019,9,26},{0,0,0}}, unlimited},
         %% parallel job         
         {no_singleton_job, "@minutely", {timer, sleep, [61000]}, unlimited, unlimited, [{singleton, false}]}            
     ]}}
].
```

* When `time_zone` is `local`, current datetime is [calendar:local_time()](http://erlang.org/doc/man/calendar.html#local_time-0).
* When `time_zone` is `utc`, current datetime is [calendar:universal_time()](http://erlang.org/doc/man/calendar.html#universal_time-0).
* The job will be auto remove at the end of the time.
* Default job is singleton, Each task cannot be executed concurrently. 
* If the system clock suddenly alter a lot(such as sleep your laptop for two hours or modify system time manually),
  it will skip the tasks which are supposed be running during the sudden lapse of time,
  then recalculate the next running time by the latest system time.
  You can also reload task manually by `ecron:reload().`

## Advanced Usage 

```erlang
Spec = #{second => [0], 
       minute => '*',   
       hour => [{0,5}, 18], %% same as [0,1,2,3,4,5,18]
       month => '*',
       day_of_month => '*',
       day_of_week => [{0,5}]},
CronMFA = {io, format, ["Runs on 0-5,18 o'clock between Sunday and Firday.~n"]},
%% with name crontab  
{ok, _} = ecron:add(crontabUniqueName, Spec, CronMFA),
%% or
{ok, _} = ecron:add(crontabUniqueName, "0 * 0-5,18 * * 0-5", CronMFA),   
ok = ecron:delete(crontabuniqueName),
%% crontab with startTime and endTime
StartDateTime = {{2019,9,19},{0,0,0}},
EndDateTime = {{2020,9,19},{0,0,0}},
{ok, _} = ecron:add(crontabUniqueName, Spec, CronMFA, StartDateTime, EndDateTime),
%% crontab without name
{ok, JobName} = ecron:add(Spec, CronMFA, StartDateTime, EndDateTime), 
ok = ecron:delete(crontabuniqueName),
%% Runs every 120 second (fixed interval)
EveryMFA = {io, format, ["Runs every 120 second.~n"]},
{ok, _} = ecron:add(everyUniqueName, 120, EveryMFA),
```
## Debug Support

There are some function to get information for a Job and to handle the Job and Invocations.
````erlang
1> ecron:deactivate(CrontabName).
ok

2> ecron:activate(CrontabName).
ok

3> ecron:statistic(CrontabName).
{ok,
  #{crontab =>
      #{day_of_month => '*',
       day_of_week => [{1,5}],hour => [1,13],
       minute => [0],month => '*',second => [0]},
       start_time => unlimited,end_time => unlimited,
       failed => 0,mfa => {io,format,["ddd"]},
       name => test,status => activate,type => cron,
       ok => 0,results => [],run_microsecond => [],       
       opts => [{singleton,true}],
       next =>
          ["2019-09-27T01:00:00+08:00","2019-09-27T13:00:00+08:00",
           "2019-09-30T01:00:00+08:00","2019-09-30T13:00:00+08:00",
           "2019-10-01T01:00:00+08:00","2019-10-01T13:00:00+08:00",
           "2019-10-02T01:00:00+08:00","2019-10-02T13:00:00+08:00",
           [...]|...]      
      }
}

4> ecron:parse_spec("0 0 1,13 * * 1-5", 5).
{ok,
#{crontab =>
      #{day_of_month => '*',
        day_of_week => [{1,5}],
        hour => [1,13],
        minute => [0],
        month => '*',
        second => [0]},
  next =>
      ["2019-09-16T13:00:00+08:00","2019-09-17T01:00:00+08:00",
       "2019-09-17T13:00:00+08:00","2019-09-18T01:00:00+08:00",
       "2019-09-18T13:00:00+08:00"],
  type => cron}
}
````

## CRON Expression Format

A [cron expression](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Cron) represents a set of times, using 5-6 space-separated fields.
Currently, W (nearest weekday), L (last day of month/week), and # (nth weekday of the month) are not supported. 

Most other features supported by popular cron implementations should work just fine.
```shell script
 # ┌────────────── second (optional)
 # │ ┌──────────── minute
 # │ │ ┌────────── hour
 # │ │ │ ┌──────── day of month
 # │ │ │ │ ┌────── month
 # │ │ │ │ │ ┌──── day of week
 # │ │ │ │ │ │
 # │ │ │ │ │ │
 # 0 * * * * *
```

Field name   | Mandatory? | Allowed values  | Allowed special characters
----------   | ---------- | --------------  | --------------------------
Seconds      | No         | 0-59            | * / , -
Minutes      | Yes        | 0-59            | * / , -
Hours        | Yes        | 0-23            | * / , -
Day of month | Yes        | 1-31            | * / , -
Month        | Yes        | 1-12 or JAN-DEC | * / , -
Day of week  | Yes        | 0-6 or SUN-SAT  | * / , -

Note: Month and Day-of-week field values are case insensitive. "SUN", "Sun", and "sun" are equally accepted.

When specifying your cron values you'll need to make sure that your values fall within the ranges. 
For instance, some cron's use a 0-7 range for the day of week where both 0 and 7 represent Sunday. We do not.

### Special Characters
#### Asterisk ( * )
The asterisk indicates that the cron expression will match for all values of the field. 
For example, using an asterisk in the `month` field would indicate every month.

#### Slash ( / )
Slashes are used to describe increments of ranges. 
For example, "3-59/15" in the `minutes` field would indicate the 3rd minute of the hour and every 15 minutes thereafter. 
The form "*/..." is equivalent to the form "First-Last/...", that is, an increment over the largest possible range of the field. 
The form "N/..." is accepted as meaning "N-Max/...", that is, starting at N, use the increment until the end of that specific range. 
It does not wrap around.

#### Comma ( , )
Commas are used to separate items of a list. 
For example, using "MON,WED,FRI" in the `day_of_week` field would mean Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays.

#### Hyphen ( - )
Hyphens are used to define ranges. 
For example, using "9-17" in the `hours`field  would indicate every hour between 9am and 5pm inclusive.

## Predefined crontab

You may use one of several pre-defined crontab in place of a cron expression.

Entry                  | Description                                | Equivalent To
-----                  | -----------                                | -------------
@yearly (or @annually) | Run once a year, midnight, Jan. 1st        | 0 0 0 1 1 *
@monthly               | Run once a month, midnight, first of month | 0 0 0 1 * *
@weekly                | Run once a week, midnight between Sat/Sun  | 0 0 0 * * 0
@daily (or @midnight)  | Run once a day, midnight                   | 0 0 0 * * *
@hourly                | Run once an hour, beginning of hour        | 0 0 * * * *
@minutely              | Run once an minute, beginning of minute    | 0 * * * * *

>There are tools that help when constructing your cronjobs. 
>You might find something like [https://crontab.guru/](https://crontab.guru/) or [https://cronjob.xyz/](https://cronjob.xyz/) helpful. 
>But, note that these don't necessarily accept the exact same syntax as this library, 
>for instance, it doesn't accept the seconds field, so keep that in mind.

## Intervals

You may also schedule a job to execute at fixed intervals, starting at the time it's added or cron is run. 
This is supported by formatting the cron spec like this:
```shell
@every <duration>
```
For example, "@every 1h30m10s" would indicate a schedule that activates after 1 hour, 30 minutes, 10 seconds, and then every interval after that.

>Note: The interval doesn't take the job runtime into account. 
>For example, if a job takes 3 minutes to run, and it is scheduled to run every 5 minutes, 
>it will have 5 minutes of idle time between each run.
  
## Implementation

1. On application start-up, start a standalone gen_server `ecron` under supervision tree(`ecron_sup`).
2. Look for configuration `{jobs, Jobs}` when  ecron process initialization.
3. For each crontab job found, determine the next time in the future that each command must run.
4. Place those commands on the ordered_set ets with their `{Corresponding_time, Name}` to run as key.
5. Enter main loop:
    * Examine the task entry at the head of the ets, compute how far in the future it must run.
    * Sleep for that period of time by gen_server timeout feature.
    * On awakening and after verifying the correct time, execute the task at the head of the ets (spawn in background).
    * Delete old key in ets.
    * Determine the next time in the future to run this command and place it back on the ets at that time value.
    
Additionally, this ecron also collect the MFA latest 16 results and execute times, you can observe by `ecron:statistic(Name)`.       

## Telemetry
Ecron publish events through telemetry, you can handle those events by [this guide](https://github.com/zhongwencool/ecron/blob/master/doc/telemetry.md), 
such as you can monitor events dispatch duration and failures to create alerts which notify somebody.

## Proper Test


```shell
  $ rebar3 do proper -c, cover -v
```

## TODO

* support the last day of a month.
* support `global` in cluster.

Commit message:

fixed cluster_quorum_size wrong

README.md, after:

## ecron
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/zhongwencool/ecron.png?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/zhongwencool/ecron)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/zhongwencool/ecron/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/github/zhongwencool/ecron?branch=master)
[![Hex.pm](https://img.shields.io/hexpm/v/ecron.svg?style=flat)](https://hex.pm/packages/ecron)

A lightweight/efficient cron-like job scheduling library for Erlang.

Ecron does not poll the system on a minute-by-minute basis like cron does. 
All jobs is assigned to a single process, just run as same as the [timer](http://erlang.org/doc/man/timer.html).

It organize the tasks to be run in a ordered_set ets with the next time to run as key. 
This way, you only need one process that calculates the time to wait until the next task should be executed, 
then spawn the process to execute that task. Saves lots of processes. 
more detail see [Implementation](#Implementation).
 
This implementation also prevents a lot of messages from flying around.

It offers:

* Both cron-like scheduling and interval-based scheduling.
* Well tested by `PropTest` ![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/zhongwencool/ecron/badge.svg?branch=master).
* Use gen_server timeout(`receive after`) at any given time (rather than reevaluating upcoming jobs every second/minute).
* Minimal overhead. ecron aims to keep its code base small.

You can find a collection of general best practices in [Full Erlang Examples](https://github.com/zhongwencool/ecron/blob/master/examples/titan_erlang) and [Full Elixir Examples](https://github.com/zhongwencool/ecron/blob/master/examples/titan_elixir).

## Installation
  
**Erlang**
 ```erlang
  %% rebar.config
  {deps, [ecron]}
 ```

**Elixir**
 ```elixir
  # mix.exs
  def deps do
    [{:ecron, "~> 0.4"}]
  end
```

## Basic Usage 

```erlang
%% sys.config
[
   {ecron, [      
      {time_zone, local}, %% local or utc
      {local_jobs, [
         %% {JobName, CrontabSpec, {M, F, A}}
         %% {JobName, CrontabSpec, {M, F, A}, StartDateTime, EndDateTime}
         %% CrontabSpec
            %%  1. "Minute Hour DayOfMonth Month DayOfWeek"
            %%  2. "Second Minute Hour DayOfMonth Month DayOfWeek"
            %%  3. @yearly | @annually | @monthly | @weekly | @daily | @midnight | @hourly
            %%  4. @every 1h2m3s
                  
         {crontab_job, "*/15 * * * *", {io, format, ["Runs on 0, 15, 30, 45 minutes~n"]}},
         {extend_crontab_job, "0 0 1-6/2,18 * * *", {io, format, ["Runs on 1,3,6,18 o'clock:~n"]}},
         {alphabet_job, "@hourly", {io, format, ["Runs every(0-23) o'clock~n"]}},    
         {fixed_interval_job, "@every 30m", {io, format, ["Runs every 30 minutes"]}},
         %% Runs 0-23 o'clock since {{2019,9,26},{0,0,0}}.
         {limit_datetime_job, "@hourly", {io, format, ["Runs every(0-23) o'clock~n"]}, {{2019,9,26},{0,0,0}}, unlimited},
         %% parallel job         
         {no_singleton_job, "@minutely", {timer, sleep, [61000]}, unlimited, unlimited, [{singleton, false}]}            
     ]},
     {global_jobs, []}, %% Global Spec has the same format as local_jobs.
     {cluster_quorum_size, 1} %%  Minimum number of nodes which run ecron. Global_jobs only run on majority cluster when it > ClusterNode/2.
    }
].
```

* When `time_zone` is `local`, current datetime is [calendar:local_time()](http://erlang.org/doc/man/calendar.html#local_time-0).
* When `time_zone` is `utc`, current datetime is [calendar:universal_time()](http://erlang.org/doc/man/calendar.html#universal_time-0).
* The job will be auto remove at the end of the time.
* Default job is singleton, Each task cannot be executed concurrently. 
* If the system clock suddenly alter a lot(such as sleep your laptop for two hours or modify system time manually),
  it will skip the tasks which are supposed be running during the sudden lapse of time,
  then recalculate the next running time by the latest system time.
  You can also reload task manually by `ecron:reload().`
* Global jobs depend on [global](http://erlang.org/doc/man/global.html), only allowed to be added statically, [check for more detail](https://github.com/zhongwencool/ecron/blob/master/doc/global.md).

## Advanced Usage 

```erlang
Spec = #{second => [0], 
       minute => '*',   
       hour => [{0,5}, 18], %% same as [0,1,2,3,4,5,18]
       month => '*',
       day_of_month => '*',
       day_of_week => [{0,5}]},
CronMFA = {io, format, ["Runs on 0-5,18 o'clock between Sunday and Firday.~n"]},
%% with name crontab  
{ok, _} = ecron:add(crontabUniqueName, Spec, CronMFA),
%% or
{ok, _} = ecron:add(crontabUniqueName, "0 * 0-5,18 * * 0-5", CronMFA),   
ok = ecron:delete(crontabuniqueName),
%% crontab with startTime and endTime
StartDateTime = {{2019,9,19},{0,0,0}},
EndDateTime = {{2020,9,19},{0,0,0}},
{ok, _} = ecron:add(crontabUniqueName, Spec, CronMFA, StartDateTime, EndDateTime),
%% crontab without name
{ok, JobName} = ecron:add(Spec, CronMFA, StartDateTime, EndDateTime), 
ok = ecron:delete(crontabuniqueName),
%% Runs every 120 second (fixed interval)
EveryMFA = {io, format, ["Runs every 120 second.~n"]},
{ok, _} = ecron:add(everyUniqueName, 120, EveryMFA),
```
## Debug Support

There are some function to get information for a Job and to handle the Job and Invocations.
````erlang
1> ecron:deactivate(CrontabName).
ok

2> ecron:activate(CrontabName).
ok

3> ecron:statistic(CrontabName).
{ok,
  #{crontab =>
      #{day_of_month => '*',
       day_of_week => [{1,5}],hour => [1,13],
       minute => [0],month => '*',second => [0]},
       start_time => unlimited,end_time => unlimited,
       failed => 0,mfa => {io,format,["ddd"]},
       name => test,status => activate,type => cron,
       ok => 0,results => [],run_microsecond => [],       
       opts => [{singleton,true}],
       next =>
          ["2019-09-27T01:00:00+08:00","2019-09-27T13:00:00+08:00",
           "2019-09-30T01:00:00+08:00","2019-09-30T13:00:00+08:00",
           "2019-10-01T01:00:00+08:00","2019-10-01T13:00:00+08:00",
           "2019-10-02T01:00:00+08:00","2019-10-02T13:00:00+08:00",
           [...]|...]      
      }
}

4> ecron:parse_spec("0 0 1,13 * * 1-5", 5).
{ok,
#{crontab =>
      #{day_of_month => '*',
        day_of_week => [{1,5}],
        hour => [1,13],
        minute => [0],
        month => '*',
        second => [0]},
  next =>
      ["2019-09-16T13:00:00+08:00","2019-09-17T01:00:00+08:00",
       "2019-09-17T13:00:00+08:00","2019-09-18T01:00:00+08:00",
       "2019-09-18T13:00:00+08:00"],
  type => cron}
}
````

## CRON Expression Format

A [cron expression](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Cron) represents a set of times, using 5-6 space-separated fields.
Currently, W (nearest weekday), L (last day of month/week), and # (nth weekday of the month) are not supported. 

Most other features supported by popular cron implementations should work just fine.
```shell script
 # ┌────────────── second (optional)
 # │ ┌──────────── minute
 # │ │ ┌────────── hour
 # │ │ │ ┌──────── day of month
 # │ │ │ │ ┌────── month
 # │ │ │ │ │ ┌──── day of week
 # │ │ │ │ │ │
 # │ │ │ │ │ │
 # 0 * * * * *
```

Field name   | Mandatory? | Allowed values  | Allowed special characters
----------   | ---------- | --------------  | --------------------------
Seconds      | No         | 0-59            | * / , -
Minutes      | Yes        | 0-59            | * / , -
Hours        | Yes        | 0-23            | * / , -
Day of month | Yes        | 1-31            | * / , -
Month        | Yes        | 1-12 or JAN-DEC | * / , -
Day of week  | Yes        | 0-6 or SUN-SAT  | * / , -

Note: Month and Day-of-week field values are case insensitive. "SUN", "Sun", and "sun" are equally accepted.

When specifying your cron values you'll need to make sure that your values fall within the ranges. 
For instance, some cron's use a 0-7 range for the day of week where both 0 and 7 represent Sunday. We do not.

### Special Characters
#### Asterisk ( * )
The asterisk indicates that the cron expression will match for all values of the field. 
For example, using an asterisk in the `month` field would indicate every month.

#### Slash ( / )
Slashes are used to describe increments of ranges. 
For example, "3-59/15" in the `minutes` field would indicate the 3rd minute of the hour and every 15 minutes thereafter. 
The form "*/..." is equivalent to the form "First-Last/...", that is, an increment over the largest possible range of the field. 
The form "N/..." is accepted as meaning "N-Max/...", that is, starting at N, use the increment until the end of that specific range. 
It does not wrap around.

#### Comma ( , )
Commas are used to separate items of a list. 
For example, using "MON,WED,FRI" in the `day_of_week` field would mean Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays.

#### Hyphen ( - )
Hyphens are used to define ranges. 
For example, using "9-17" in the `hours`field  would indicate every hour between 9am and 5pm inclusive.

## Predefined crontab

You may use one of several pre-defined crontab in place of a cron expression.

Entry                  | Description                                | Equivalent To
-----                  | -----------                                | -------------
@yearly (or @annually) | Run once a year, midnight, Jan. 1st        | 0 0 0 1 1 *
@monthly               | Run once a month, midnight, first of month | 0 0 0 1 * *
@weekly                | Run once a week, midnight between Sat/Sun  | 0 0 0 * * 0
@daily (or @midnight)  | Run once a day, midnight                   | 0 0 0 * * *
@hourly                | Run once an hour, beginning of hour        | 0 0 * * * *
@minutely              | Run once an minute, beginning of minute    | 0 * * * * *

>There are tools that help when constructing your cronjobs. 
>You might find something like [https://crontab.guru/](https://crontab.guru/) or [https://cronjob.xyz/](https://cronjob.xyz/) helpful. 
>But, note that these don't necessarily accept the exact same syntax as this library, 
>for instance, it doesn't accept the seconds field, so keep that in mind.

## Intervals

You may also schedule a job to execute at fixed intervals, starting at the time it's added or cron is run. 
This is supported by formatting the cron spec like this:
```shell
@every <duration>
```
For example, "@every 1h30m10s" would indicate a schedule that activates after 1 hour, 30 minutes, 10 seconds, and then every interval after that.

>Note: The interval doesn't take the job runtime into account. 
>For example, if a job takes 3 minutes to run, and it is scheduled to run every 5 minutes, 
>it will have 5 minutes of idle time between each run.
  
## Implementation

1. On application start-up, start a standalone gen_server `ecron` under supervision tree(`ecron_sup`).
2. Look for configuration `{jobs, Jobs}` when  ecron process initialization.
3. For each crontab job found, determine the next time in the future that each command must run.
4. Place those commands on the ordered_set ets with their `{Corresponding_time, Name}` to run as key.
5. Enter main loop:
    * Examine the task entry at the head of the ets, compute how far in the future it must run.
    * Sleep for that period of time by gen_server timeout feature.
    * On awakening and after verifying the correct time, execute the task at the head of the ets (spawn in background).
    * Delete old key in ets.
    * Determine the next time in the future to run this command and place it back on the ets at that time value.
    
Additionally, this ecron also collect the MFA latest 16 results and execute times, you can observe by `ecron:statistic(Name)`.       

## Telemetry
Ecron publish events through telemetry, you can handle those events by [this guide](https://github.com/zhongwencool/ecron/blob/master/doc/telemetry.md), 
such as you can monitor events dispatch duration and failures to create alerts which notify somebody.

## Proper Test


```shell
  $ rebar3 do proper -c, ct -c, cover -v
```

## TODO

* support the last day of a month.
